sendfile


                  ----------------  SENDFILE  ---------------                   
                                                                                
File(s) to be sent    (use * for Filename, Filetype and/or Filemode             
                            to select from a list of files)                     
Enter filename :                                                                
      filetype :                                                                
      filemode :                                                                
                                                                                
Send files to  :                                                                
                                                                                
Type over 1 for YES or 0 for NO to change the options:                          
                                                                                
   0    Request acknowledgement when the file has been received?                
   1    Make a log entry when the file has been sent?                           
   1    Display the file name when the file has been sent?                      
   0    This file is actually a list of files to be sent?                       
   0    TCP/IP destinations to be transmitted  by Unsolicited File Transfer?    
                                                                                
 A    Spool class to use when sending the file(s)                               
                                                                                
   1= Help            3= Quit             5= Send               12= Cursor      
                                                                                
====>                                                                           
                                                            Macro-read 1 File   




Specify the filename, filetype and filemode of the file to send. Assuming you have saved your VM direct
file to disk, you would enter your userid (Zxxxxx) as the filename, DIRECT as the filetype and A as
the filemode.
Where it says Send files to: , type ZXP at IBMZ as the network destination.
Now press the PF5 key to process and send the file. You should see output similar to:


What just happened?
sendfile saves the current settings of your punch device (from CP QUERY PUNCH)
sendfile application determines the network gateway machine for sending files/messages to other
systems, using the CMS IDENTIFY command - in your case this is “RSCS”
sendfile “spools” your PUNCH device to the reader queue for RSCS, using the CP SPOOL command - it
usually will set the punch device to “hold” outgoing files/messages until told to release them
once all the local work is done

sendfile “punches” a copy of the file you requested using the CMS PUNCH command
sendfile releases the files into the spool, again using CP SPOOL
sendfile restores the original punch device settings (again using CP SPOOL)
Some time later, RSCS ( Remote Spooling Communications Subsystem ) can read in the file and use whatever
protocol is needed to arrange the file transfer to the destination user and/or system.
In the next section, you’ll learn a bit about service machines, and get a peek at what some of those
VMs look like under the hood.
                                                            
